Dear Committee on Transportation and Public Way,

Hello, I’m Michael McLean, a car-free resident in Chicago. I have lived without a car in this city for 6 years and I rely on walking, cycling, and transit to move around the city. In this comment I will share my experience on transit in this city, and provide two very simple steps you can take to fix our transit crisis.

I’ve been in Chicago long enough to remember what CTA service was like before 2020. When I lived in North Center, I could step onto the train platform during rush hour, and within 5 minutes a train would arrive to take me to work. Sometimes I would even see former Mayor Rahm Emanuel on the train car with me.
On the weekends I would wait no more than 10 minutes on the platform to run an errand or meet my friends for dinner.

What has transpired since then has been a catastrophe. According to data from CTA, we have seen a 34% decline in service in just 4 years on our train system. Our buses have seen similar declines. I have lost count of how many people I know who have told me they bought a car and started commuting with it for the first time ever, due to our inadequate service.

We have been given excuses that this is just a natural outcome of Covid. But other North American cities with smaller populations than Chicago have restored or exceeded pre-pandemic service.

Train operator headcount is the top bottleneck for train service at the moment. CTA’s own reporting shows a decline in headcount in the most recent month of reporting in December.

In order to fix the headcount issue, please do two things:

1. Remove the requirement that a train operator must work the Flagger job before being promoted to the Operator role. Other cities with heavy rail do not have this requirement and it is not required by the FRA.
2. Promote the Operator role on the CTA homepage. Run advertisements. Market the job as a climate hero. One operator removes thousands of cars from our roads, and they deserve to be celebrated for it!

These are very straight forward issues to solve. Please increase headcount and restore service. Chicago deserves better, and with a few simple actions we can turn this situation around.

Thank you,
Michael McLean
